---
title: Interlinear Demo
---

[The Leipzig Glossing Rules](http://www.eva.mpg.de/lingua/resources/glossing-rules.php)
=======================================================================================

Styled with [interlinear.js](http://parryc.github.io/interlinear)
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The Leipzig Glossing Rules have been developed jointly by the Department
of Linguistics of the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology
(Bernard Comrie, Martin Haspelmath) and by the Department of Linguistics
of the University of Leipzig (Balthasar Bickel). They consist of ten
rules for the “syntax” and “semantics” of interlinear glosses, and an
appendix with a proposed “lexicon” of abbreviated category labels. The
rules cover a large part of linguists’ needs in glossing texts, but most
authors will feel the need to add (or modify) certain conventions
(especially category labels). Still, it will be useful to have a
standard set of conventions that linguists can refer to, and the Leipzig
Rules are proposed as such to the community of linguists. The Rules are
intended to reflect common usage, and only very few (mostly optional)
innovations are proposed.\
We intend to update the Leipzig Glossing Rules occasionally, so feedback
is highly welcome.\
\
Important references:\
Lehmann, Christian. 1982. “Directions for interlinear morphemic
translations”. *Folia Linguistica* 16: 199-224.\
Croft, William. 2003. *Typology and universals.* 2nd ed. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, pp. xix-xxv.\

The rules
---------

**(revised version of February 2008)**

### Preamble

Interlinear morpheme-by-morpheme glosses give information about the
meanings and grammatical properties of individual words and parts of
words. Linguists by and large conform to certain notational conventions
in glossing, and the main purpose of this document is to make the most
widely used conventions explicit.\
Depending on the author’s purposes and the readers’ assumed background
knowledge, different degrees of detail will be chosen. The current rules
therefore allow some flexibility in various respects, and sometimes
alternative options are mentioned.\
The main purpose that is assumed here is the presentation of an example
in a research paper or book. When an entire corpus is tagged, somewhat
different considerations may apply (e.g. one may want to add information
about larger units such as words or phrases; the rules here only allow
for information about morphemes).\
\
It should also be noted that there are often multiple ways of analyzing
the morphological patterns of a language. The glossing conventions do
not help linguists in deciding between them, but merely provide standard
ways of abbreviating possible descriptions. Moreover, glossing is rarely
a complete morphological description, and it should be kept in mind that
its purpose is not to state an analysis, but to give some further
possibly relevant information on the structure of a text or an example,
beyond the idiomatic translation.\
\
A remark on the treatment of glosses in data cited from other sources:
Glosses are part of the analysis, not part of the data. When citing an
example from a published source, the gloss may be changed by the author
if they prefer different terminology, a different style or a different
analysis.

### Rule 1: Word-by-word alignment

Interlinear glosses are left-aligned vertically, word by word, with the
example. E.g.

<div class="gloss">

Indonesian (Sneddon 1996:237)\
Mereka di Jakarta sekarang.\
They in Jakarta now\
! ‘They are in Jakarta now.’

</div>

\

### Rule 2: Morpheme-by-morpheme correspondence

Segmentable morphemes are separated by hyphens, both in the example and
in the gloss. There must be exactly the same number of hyphens in the
example and in the gloss. E.g.

<div class="gloss">

Lezgian (Haspelmath 1993:207)\
Gila abur-u-n ferma hamišaluǧ güǧüna amuq’-da-č.\
now they-\*OBL\*-\*GEN\* farm forever behind stay-\*FUT\*-\*NEG\*\
! ‘Now their farm will not stay behind forever.’

</div>

\
Since hyphens and vertical alignment make the text look unusual, authors
may want to add another line at the beginning, containing the unmodified
text, or resort to the option described in Rule 4 (and especially 4C).\
Clitic boundaries are marked by an equals sign, both in the object
language and in the gloss.\
\

<div class="gloss" data-synthetic="1">

West Greenlandic (Fortescue 1984:127)\
palasi=lu niuirtur=lu\
priest=and shopkeeper=and\
! ‘both the priest and the shopkeeper’

</div>

\
Epenthetic segments occurring at a morpheme boundary should be assigned
to either the preceding or the following morpheme. Which morpheme is to
be chosen may be determined by various principles that are not easy to
generalize over, so no rule will be provided for this.

### Rule 2A. (Optional)

If morphologically bound elements constitute distinct prosodic or
phonological words, a hyphen and a single space may be used together in
the object language (but not in the gloss).

<div class="gloss">

Hakha Lai\
a-nii -láay\
\*3SG\*-laugh-\*FUT\*\
! ‘s/he will laugh’

</div>

### Rule 3: Grammatical category labels

Grammatical morphemes are generally rendered by abbreviated grammatical
category labels, printed in upper case letters (usually small capitals).
A list of standard abbreviations (which are widely known among
linguists) is given at the end of this document.\
Deviations from these standard abbreviations may of course be necessary
in particular cases, e.g. if a category is highly frequent in a
language, so that a shorter abbreviation is more convenient, e.g. CPL
(instead of COMPL) for “completive”, PF (instead of PRF) for “perfect”,
etc. If a category is very rare, it may be simplest not to abbreviate
its label at all.\
In many cases, either a category label or a word from the metalanguage
is acceptable. Thus, both of the two glosses of (5) may be chosen,
depending on the purpose of the gloss.\
\
*interlinear.js* note: Since lines 3 and 4 are either or but not both,
there is currently no support for displaying both at once with the same
class.\
\

<div class="gloss">

Russian\
My s Marko poexa-l-i avtobus-om v Peredelkino.\
\*1PL\* \*COM\* Marko go-\*PST\*-\*PL\* bus-\*INS\* \*ALL\* Peredelkino\
we with Marko go-\*PST-PL\* bus-by to Peredelkino\
! ‘Marko and I went to Perdelkino by bus.’

</div>

### Rule 4: One-to-many correspondences

When a single object-language element is rendered by several
metalanguage elements (words or abbreviations), these are separated by
periods. E.g.

<div class="gloss">

Turkish\
çık-mak\
come.out-\*INF\*\
! ‘to come out’

</div>

\

<div class="gloss">

Latin\
insul-arum\
island-\*GEN.PL\*\
! ‘of the islands’

</div>

\

<div class="gloss">

French\
aux chevaux\
to.\*ART.PL\* horse.\*PL\*\
! ‘to the horses’

</div>

\

<div class="gloss">

German\
unser-n Väter-n\
our-\*DAT.PL\* father.\*PL-DAT.PL\*\
! ‘to our fathers’

</div>

\

<div class="gloss">

Hittite (Lehmann 1982:211)\
n=an apedani mehuni essandu.\
\*CONN\*=him that.\*DAT.SG\* time.\*DAT.SG\* eat.they.shall\
! ‘They shall celebrate him on that date. (CONN = connective)’

</div>

\

<div class="gloss">

Jaminjung (Schultze-Berndt 2000:92)\
nanggayan guny-bi-yarluga?\
who \*2DU.A.3SG.P-FUT\*-poke\
! ‘Who do you two want to spear?’

</div>

\
The ordering of the two metalanguage elements may be determined by
various principles that are not easy to generalize over, so no rule will
be provided for this. There are various reasons for a one-to-many
correspondence between objectlanguage elements and gloss elements. These
are conflated by the uniform use of the period. If one wants to
distinguish between them, one may follow Rules 4A-E.

### Rule 4A. (Optional)

If an object-language element is neither formally nor semantically
segmentable and only the metalanguage happens to lack a single-word
equivalent, the underscore may be used instead of the period.

<div class="gloss">

Turkish (cf. 6)\
çık-mak\
come\_out-\*INF\*\
! ‘to come out’

</div>

### Rule 4B. (Optional)

If an object-language element is formally unsegmentable but has two or
more clearly distinguishable meanings or grammatical properties, the
semi-colon may be used. E.g.

<div class="gloss">

Latin (cf. 7)\
insul-arum\
island-\*GEN;PL\*\
! ‘of the islands’

</div>

\

<div class="gloss">

French\
aux chevaux\
to;\*ART\*;\*PL\* horse;\*PL\*\
! ‘to the horses’

</div>

### Rule 4C. (Optional)

If an object-language element is formally and semantically segmentable,
but the author does not want to show the formal segmentation (because it
is irrelevant and/or to keep the text intact), the colon may be used.
E.g.

<div class="gloss">

Hittite (Lehmann 1982:211) (cf. 10)\
n=an apedani mehuni essandu.\
\*CONN\*=him that:\*DAT\*;\*SG\* time:\*DAT\*;\*SG\* eat:they:shall\
! ‘They shall celebrate him on that date.’

</div>

### Rule 4D. (Optional)

If a grammatical property in the object-language is signaled by a
morphophonological change (ablaut, mutation, tone alternation, etc.),
the backslash is used to separate the category label and the rest of the
gloss.

<div class="gloss">

German (cf. 9)\
unser-n Väter-n\
our-\*DAT.PL\* father\\\*PL-DAT.PL\*\
! ‘to our fathers (cf. singular Vater)’

</div>

\

<div class="gloss">

Irish\
bhris-is\
\*PST\*\\break-\*2SG\*\
! ‘you broke (cf. nonpast bris-)’

</div>

\

<div class="gloss">

Kinyarwanda\
mú-kòrà\
SBJV\\1PL-work\
! ‘that we work (cf. indicative mù-kòrà)’

</div>

### Rule 4E. (Optional)

If a language has person-number affixes that express the agent-like and
the patientlike argument of a transitive verb simultaneously, the symbol
“&gt;” may be used in the gloss to indicate that the first is the
agent-like argument and the second is the patient-like argument.

<div class="gloss">

Jaminjung (Schultze-Berndt 2000:92) (cf. 11)\
nanggayan guny-bi-yarluga?\
who \*2DU&gt;3SG-FUT\*-poke\
! ‘Who do you two want to spear?’

</div>

### Rule 5: Person and number labels

Person and number are not separated by a period when they cooccur in
this order. E.g.

<div class="gloss">

Italian\
and-iamo xx\
go-\*PRS.1PL\*\
! ‘we go’\
! ‘(not: go-\*PRS.1.PL\*)’

</div>

### Rule 5A. (Optional)

Number and gender markers are very frequent in some languages,
especially when combined with person. Several authors therefore use
non-capitalized shortened abbreviations without a period. If this option
is adopted, then the second gloss is used in (21).

<div class="gloss">

Belhare\
ne-e a-khim-chi n-yuNNa\
\*DEM-LOC\* \*1SG.POSS\*-house-\*PL\* \*3NSG\*-be.\*NPST\*\
\*DEM-LOC\* 1s\*POSS\*-house-PL 3ns-be.\*NPST\*\
! ‘Here are my houses.’

</div>

### Rule 6: Non-overt elements

If the morpheme-by-morpheme gloss contains an element that does not
correspond to an overt element in the example, it can be enclosed in
square brackets. An obvious alternative is to include an overt “Ø” in
the object-language text, which is separated by a hyphen like an overt
element.

<div class="gloss">

Latin\
puer or: puer-Ø\
boy\[\*NOM.SG\*\] xx boy-\*NOM.SG\*\
‘boy’ xx ‘boy’

</div>

### Rule 7: Inherent categories

Inherent, non-overt categories such as gender may be indicated in the
gloss, but a special boundary symbol, the round parenthesis, is used.
E.g.

<div class="gloss">

Hunzib (van den Berg 1995:46)\
oz\#-di-g xõxe m-uq’e-r\
boy-\*OBL-AD\* tree(G4) \*G4\*-bend-\*PRET\*\
! ‘Because of the boy the tree bent.’\
! ‘(\*G4\* = 4th gender, \*AD\* = adessive, \*PRET\* = preterite)’

</div>

### Rule 8: Bipartite elements

Grammatical or lexical elements that consist of two parts which are
treated as distinct morphological entities (e.g. bipartite stems such as
Lakhota na-xʔu̧ ‘hear’) may be treated in two different ways: (i) The
gloss may simply be repeated:\
\

<div class="gloss">

Lakhota\
na-wíčha-wa-xʔu̧\
hear-\*3PL.UND-1SG.ACT\*-hear\
! ‘I hear them (\*UND\* = undergoer, \*ACT\* = actor)’ helllo hi

</div>

\
(ii) One of the two parts may be represented by a special label such as
STEM:\
\

<div class="gloss">

Lakhota\
na-wíčha-wa-xʔu̧\
hear-\*3PL.UND-1SG.ACT\*- \*STEM\*\
! ‘I hear them’

</div>

\
Circumfixes are “bipartite affixes” and can be treated in the same way,
e.g.\
\

<div class="gloss">

German\
ge-seh-en or: ge-seh-en\
\*PTCP\*-see-\*PTCP\* xx \*PTCP\*-see-\*CIRC\*\
‘seen’ xx ‘seen’

</div>

### Rule 9: Infixes

Infixes are enclosed by angle brackets, and so is the object-language
counterpart in the gloss.\
\

<div class="gloss">

Tagalog\
b&lt;um&gt;ili (stem: bili)\
&lt;\*ACTFOC\*&gt;buy\
! ‘buy’

</div>

\

<div class="gloss">

Latin\
reli&lt;n&gt;qu-ere (stem: reliqu-)\
leave&lt;\*PRS\*&gt;-\*INF\*\
‘to leave’

</div>

\
Infixes are generally easily identifiable as left-peripheral (as in 27)
or as right-peripheral (as in 28), and this determines the position of
the gloss corresponding to the infix with respect to the gloss of the
stem. If the infix is not clearly peripheral, some other basis for
linearizing the gloss has to be found.

### Rule 10: Reduplication

Reduplication is treated similarly to affixation, but with a tilde
(instead of an ordinary hyphen) connecting the copied element to the
stem.

<div class="gloss">

Hebrew\
yerak\~rak-im\
green\~\*ATT-M.PL\*\
! ‘greenish ones (\*ATT\* = attenuative)’

</div>

\

<div class="gloss">

Tagalog\
bi\~bili\
IPFV\~buy\
! ‘is buying’

</div>

\

<div class="gloss">

Tagalog\
b&lt;um&gt;i\~bili\
&lt;\*ACTFOC\*&gt;\*IPFV\*\~buy\
! ‘is buying (\*ACTFOC\* = Actor focus)’

</div>

### See PDF for appendixes

### References

Fortescue, Michael. 1984. *West Greenlandic.* (Croom Helm descriptive
grammars) London: Croom Helm.\
Haspelmath, Martin. 1993. *A grammar of Lezgian.* (Mouton Grammar
Library, 9). Berlin - New York: Mouton de Gruyter.\
Lehmann, Christian. 1982. *“Directions for interlinear morphemic
translations”.* Folia Linguistica 16: 199-224.\
Schultze-Berndt, Eva. 2000. *Simple and complex verbs in Jaminjung: A
study of event categorization in an Australian language.* Katholieke
Universiteit Nijmegen Ph.D. Dissertation.\
Sneddon, James Neil. 1996. *Indonesian: A comprehensive grammar.*
London: Routledge.\
van den Berg, Helma. 1995. *A Grammar of Hunzib.* (Lincom Studies in
Caucasian Linguistics, 1.) München: Lincom Europa.
